This is groff, produced by makeinfo version 4.3d from ./groff.texinfo.

This manual documents GNU `troff' version 1.19.

   Copyright (C) 1994-2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 Free Software Foundation,
Inc.

     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
     document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
     Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
     Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts
     being `A GNU Manual," and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a)
     below.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
     `GNU Free Documentation License."

     (a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: `You have freedom to copy and
     modify this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by
     the Free Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development."
   
INFO-DIR-SECTION Typesetting
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Groff: (groff).               The GNU troff document formatting system.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY


File: groff,  Node: DESC File Format,  Next: Font File Format,  Prev: Font Files,  Up: Font Files

`DESC' File Format
------------------

   The `DESC' file can contain the following types of line.  Except for
the `charset' keyword which must comes last (if at all), the order of
the lines is not important.

`res N'
     There are N machine units per inch.

`hor N'
     The horizontal resolution is N machine units.  All horizontal
     quantities are rounded to be multiples of this value.

`vert N'
     The vertical resolution is N machine units.  All vertical
     quantities are rounded to be multiples of this value.

`sizescale N'
     The scale factor for point sizes.  By default this has a value
     of 1.  One scaled point is equal to one point/N.  The arguments to
     the `unitwidth' and `sizes' commands are given in scaled points.
     *Note Fractional Type Sizes::, for more information.

`unitwidth N'
     Quantities in the font files are given in machine units for fonts
     whose point size is N scaled points.

`prepro PROGRAM'
     Call PROGRAM as a preprocessor.  Currently, this keyword is used
     by `groff' with option `-Thtml' only.

`postpro PROGRAM'
     Call PROGRAM as a postprocessor.  For example, the line


          postpro grodvi

     in the file `devdvi/DESC' makes `groff' call `grodvi' if option
     `-Tdvi' is given (and `-Z' isn't used).

`tcommand'
     This means that the postprocessor can handle the `t' and `u'
     intermediate output commands.

`sizes S1 S2 ... SN 0'
     This means that the device has fonts at S1, S2, ...  SN scaled
     points.  The list of sizes must be terminated by 0 (this is digit
     zero).  Each SI can also be a range of sizes M-N.  The list can
     extend over more than one line.

`styles S1 S2 ... SM'
     The first M font positions are associated with styles S1 ... SM.

`fonts N F1 F2 F3 ... FN'
     Fonts F1 ... FN are mounted in the font positions M+1, ..., M+N
     where M is the number of styles.  This command may extend over
     more than one line.  A font name of 0 means no font is mounted on
     the corresponding font position.

`family FAM'
     The default font family is FAM.

`use_charnames_in_special'
     This command indicates that `gtroff' should encode special
     characters inside special commands.  Currently, this is only used
     by the HTML output device.  *Note Postprocessor Access::.

`papersize STRING ...'
     Select a paper size.  Valid values for STRING are the ISO paper
     types `A0'-`A7', `B0'-`B7', `C0'-`C7', `D0'-`D7', `DL', and the US
     paper types `letter', `legal', `tabloid', `ledger', `statement',
     `executive', `com10', and `monarch'.  Case is not significant for
     STRING if it holds predefined paper types.  Alternatively, STRING
     can be a file name (e.g. `/etc/papersize'); if the file can be
     opened, `groff' reads the first line and tests for the above paper
     sizes.  Finally, STRING can be a custom paper size in the format
     `LENGTH,WIDTH' (no spaces before and after the comma).  Both
     LENGTH and WIDTH must have a unit appended; valid values are `i'
     for inches, `C' for centimeters, `p' for points, and `P' for
     picas.  Example: `12c,235p'.  An argument which starts with a
     digit is always treated as a custom paper format.  `papersize'
     sets both the vertical and horizontal dimension of the output
     medium.

     More than one argument can be specified; `groff' scans from left to
     right and uses the first valid paper specification.

`pass_filenames'
     Tell `gtroff' to emit the name of the source file currently being
     processed.  This is achieved by the intermediate output command
     `F'.  Currently, this is only used by the HTML output device.

`print PROGRAM'
     Use PROGRAM as a spooler program for printing.  If omitted, the
     `-l' and `-L' options of `groff' are ignored.

`charset'
     This line and everything following in the file are ignored.  It is
     allowed for the sake of backwards compatibility.

   The `res', `unitwidth', `fonts', and `sizes' lines are mandatory.
Other commands are ignored by `gtroff' but may be used by
postprocessors to store arbitrary information about the device in the
`DESC' file.

   Here a list of obsolete keywords which are recognized by `groff' but
completely ignored: `spare1', `spare2', `biggestfont'.


File: groff,  Node: Font File Format,  Prev: DESC File Format,  Up: Font Files

Font File Format
----------------

   A "font file", also (and probably better) called a "font description
file", has two sections.  The first section is a sequence of lines each
containing a sequence of blank delimited words; the first word in the
line is a key, and subsequent words give a value for that key.

`name F'
     The name of the font is F.

`spacewidth N'
     The normal width of a space is N.

`slant N'
     The glyphs of the font have a slant of N degrees.  (Positive means
     forward.)

`ligatures LIG1 LIG2 ... LIGN [0]'
     Glyphs LIG1, LIG2, ..., LIGN are ligatures; possible ligatures are
     `ff', `fi', `fl', `ffi' and `ffl'.  For backwards compatibility,
     the list of ligatures may be terminated with a 0.  The list of
     ligatures may not extend over more than one line.

`special'
     The font is "special"; this means that when a glyph is requested
     that is not present in the current font, it is searched for in any
     special fonts that are mounted.

   Other commands are ignored by `gtroff' but may be used by
postprocessors to store arbitrary information about the font in the font
file.

   The first section can contain comments which start with the `#'
character and extend to the end of a line.

   The second section contains one or two subsections.  It must contain
a `charset' subsection and it may also contain a `kernpairs'
subsection.  These subsections can appear in any order.  Each
subsection starts with a word on a line by itself.

   The word `charset' starts the character set subsection.(1) (*note
Font File Format-Footnote-1::)  The `charset' line is followed by a
sequence of lines.  Each line gives information for one glyph.  A line
comprises a number of fields separated by blanks or tabs.  The format is

     NAME METRICS TYPE CODE [ENTITY-NAME] [`--' COMMENT]

NAME identifies the glyph name(2) (*note Font File Format-Footnote-2::):
If NAME is a single character C then it corresponds to the `gtroff'
input character C; if it is of the form `\C' where C is a single
character, then it corresponds to the special character `\[C]';
otherwise it corresponds to the special character `\[NAME]'.  If it is
exactly two characters XX it can be entered as `\(XX'.  Note that
single-letter special characters can't be accessed as `\C'; the only
exception is `\-' which is identical to `\[-]'.

   `gtroff' supports 8-bit input characters; however some utilities
have difficulties with eight-bit characters.  For this reason, there is
a convention that the entity name `charN' is equivalent to the single
input character whose code is N.  For example, `char163' would be
equivalent to the character with code 163 which is the pounds sterling
sign in the ISO Latin-1 character set.  You shouldn't use `charN'
entities in font description files since they are related to input, not
output.  Otherwise, you get hard-coded connections between input and
output encoding which prevents use of different (input) character sets.

   The name `---' is special and indicates that the glyph is unnamed;
such glyphs can only be used by means of the `\N' escape sequence in
`gtroff'.

   The TYPE field gives the glyph type:

`1'
     the glyph has a descender, for example, `p';

`2'
     the glyph has an ascender, for example, `b';

`3'
     the glyph has both an ascender and a descender, for example, `('.

   The CODE field gives the code which the postprocessor uses to print
the glyph.  The glyph can also be input to `gtroff' using this code by
means of the `\N' escape sequence.  CODE can be any integer.  If it
starts with `0' it is interpreted as octal; if it starts with `0x' or
`0X' it is interpreted as hexadecimal.  Note, however, that the `\N'
escape sequence only accepts a decimal integer.

   The ENTITY-NAME field gives an ASCII string identifying the glyph
which the postprocessor uses to print the `gtroff' glyph NAME.  This
field is optional and has been introduced so that the HTML device
driver can encode its character set.  For example, the glyph `\[Po]' is
represented as `&pound;' in HTML 4.0.

   Anything on the line after the ENTITY-NAME field resp. after `--'
will be ignored.

   The METRICS field has the form:

     WIDTH[`,'HEIGHT[`,'DEPTH[`,'ITALIC-CORRECTION
       [`,'LEFT-ITALIC-CORRECTION[`,'SUBSCRIPT-CORRECTION]]]]]

There must not be any spaces between these subfields (it has been split
here into two lines for better legibility only).  Missing subfields are
assumed to be 0.  The subfields are all decimal integers.  Since there
is no associated binary format, these values are not required to fit
into a variable of type `char' as they are in `ditroff'.  The WIDTH
subfield gives the width of the glyph.  The HEIGHT subfield gives the
height of the glyph (upwards is positive); if a glyph does not extend
above the baseline, it should be given a zero height, rather than a
negative height.  The DEPTH subfield gives the depth of the glyph, that
is, the distance from the baseline to the lowest point below the
baseline to which the glyph extends (downwards is positive); if a glyph
does not extend below the baseline, it should be given a zero depth,
rather than a negative depth.  The ITALIC-CORRECTION subfield gives the
amount of space that should be added after the glyph when it is
immediately to be followed by a glyph from a roman font.  The
LEFT-ITALIC-CORRECTION subfield gives the amount of space that should
be added before the glyph when it is immediately to be preceded by a
glyph from a roman font.  The SUBSCRIPT-CORRECTION gives the amount of
space that should be added after a glyph before adding a subscript.
This should be less than the italic correction.

   A line in the `charset' section can also have the format


     NAME "

This indicates that NAME is just another name for the glyph mentioned
in the preceding line.

   The word `kernpairs' starts the kernpairs section.  This contains a
sequence of lines of the form:


     C1 C2 N

This means that when glyph C1 appears next to glyph C2 the space
between them should be increased by N.  Most entries in the kernpairs
section have a negative value for N.


File: groff,  Node: Font File Format-Footnotes,  Up: Font File Format

   (1) This keyword is misnamed since it starts a list of ordered
glyphs, not characters.

   (2) The distinction between input, characters, and output, glyphs,
is not clearly separated in the terminology of `groff'; for example,
the `char' request should be called `glyph' since it defines an output
entity.


File: groff,  Node: Installation,  Next: Copying This Manual,  Prev: File formats,  Up: Top

Installation
************


File: groff,  Node: Copying This Manual,  Next: Request Index,  Prev: Installation,  Up: Top

Copying This Manual
*******************

* Menu:

* GNU Free Documentation License::  License for copying this manual.


File: groff,  Node: GNU Free Documentation License,  Up: Copying This Manual

GNU Free Documentation License
==============================

                        Version 1.1, March 2000
     Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
     59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307, USA
     
     Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
     of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

  0. PREAMBLE

     The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
     written document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
     the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
     modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.  Secondarily,
     this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
     credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
     modifications made by others.

     This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative
     works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.
     It complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
     license designed for free software.

     We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for
     free software, because free software needs free documentation: a
     free program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms
     that the software does.  But this License is not limited to
     software manuals; it can be used for any textual work, regardless
     of subject matter or whether it is published as a printed book.
     We recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is
     instruction or reference.

  1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

     This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a
     notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed
     under the terms of this License.  The "Document", below, refers to
     any such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a licensee,
     and is addressed as "you".

     A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the
     Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
     modifications and/or translated into another language.

     A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter
     section of the Document that deals exclusively with the
     relationship of the publishers or authors of the Document to the
     Document's overall subject (or to related matters) and contains
     nothing that could fall directly within that overall subject.
     (For example, if the Document is in part a textbook of
     mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any mathematics.)
     The relationship could be a matter of historical connection with
     the subject or with related matters, or of legal, commercial,
     philosophical, ethical or political position regarding them.

     The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose
     titles are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in
     the notice that says that the Document is released under this
     License.

     The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are
     listed, as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice
     that says that the Document is released under this License.

     A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
     represented in a format whose specification is available to the
     general public, whose contents can be viewed and edited directly
     and straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images
     composed of pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some
     widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to
     text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of
     formats suitable for input to text formatters.  A copy made in an
     otherwise Transparent file format whose markup has been designed
     to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by readers is not
     Transparent.  A copy that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".

     Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
     ASCII without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format,
     SGML or XML using a publicly available DTD, and
     standard-conforming simple HTML designed for human modification.
     Opaque formats include PostScript, PDF, proprietary formats that
     can be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML
     or XML for which the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally
     available, and the machine-generated HTML produced by some word
     processors for output purposes only.

     The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
     plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the
     material this License requires to appear in the title page.  For
     works in formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title
     Page" means the text near the most prominent appearance of the
     work's title, preceding the beginning of the body of the text.

  2. VERBATIM COPYING

     You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
     commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
     copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License
     applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you
     add no other conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You
     may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading
     or further copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However,
     you may accept compensation in exchange for copies.  If you
     distribute a large enough number of copies you must also follow
     the conditions in section 3.

     You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above,
     and you may publicly display copies.

  3. COPYING IN QUANTITY

     If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than
     100, and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you
     must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly,
     all these Cover Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and
     Back-Cover Texts on the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly
     and legibly identify you as the publisher of these copies.  The
     front cover must present the full title with all words of the
     title equally prominent and visible.  You may add other material
     on the covers in addition.  Copying with changes limited to the
     covers, as long as they preserve the title of the Document and
     satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim copying in
     other respects.

     If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
     legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
     reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto
     adjacent pages.

     If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document
     numbering more than 100, you must either include a
     machine-readable Transparent copy along with each Opaque copy, or
     state in or with each Opaque copy a publicly-accessible
     computer-network location containing a complete Transparent copy
     of the Document, free of added material, which the general
     network-using public has access to download anonymously at no
     charge using public-standard network protocols.  If you use the
     latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you
     begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that
     this Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated
     location until at least one year after the last time you
     distribute an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or
     retailers) of that edition to the public.

     It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of
     the Document well before redistributing any large number of
     copies, to give them a chance to provide you with an updated
     version of the Document.

  4. MODIFICATIONS

     You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document
     under the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you
     release the Modified Version under precisely this License, with
     the Modified Version filling the role of the Document, thus
     licensing distribution and modification of the Modified Version to
     whoever possesses a copy of it.  In addition, you must do these
     things in the Modified Version:

       A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title
          distinct from that of the Document, and from those of
          previous versions (which should, if there were any, be listed
          in the History section of the Document).  You may use the
          same title as a previous version if the original publisher of
          that version gives permission.

       B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or
          entities responsible for authorship of the modifications in
          the Modified Version, together with at least five of the
          principal authors of the Document (all of its principal
          authors, if it has less than five).

       C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
          Modified Version, as the publisher.

       D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.

       E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
          adjacent to the other copyright notices.

       F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license
          notice giving the public permission to use the Modified
          Version under the terms of this License, in the form shown in
          the Addendum below.

       G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant
          Sections and required Cover Texts given in the Document's
          license notice.

       H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.

       I. Preserve the section entitled "History", and its title, and
          add to it an item stating at least the title, year, new
          authors, and publisher of the Modified Version as given on
          the Title Page.  If there is no section entitled "History" in
          the Document, create one stating the title, year, authors,
          and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page,
          then add an item describing the Modified Version as stated in
          the previous sentence.

       J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document
          for public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and
          likewise the network locations given in the Document for
          previous versions it was based on.  These may be placed in
          the "History" section.  You may omit a network location for a
          work that was published at least four years before the
          Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version
          it refers to gives permission.

       K. In any section entitled "Acknowledgments" or "Dedications",
          preserve the section's title, and preserve in the section all
          the substance and tone of each of the contributor
          acknowledgments and/or dedications given therein.

       L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
          unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
          or the equivalent are not considered part of the section
          titles.

       M. Delete any section entitled "Endorsements".  Such a section
          may not be included in the Modified Version.

       N. Do not retitle any existing section as "Endorsements" or to
          conflict in title with any Invariant Section.

     If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
     appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no
     material copied from the Document, you may at your option
     designate some or all of these sections as invariant.  To do this,
     add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified
     Version's license notice.  These titles must be distinct from any
     other section titles.

     You may add a section entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains
     nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
     parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text
     has been approved by an organization as the authoritative
     definition of a standard.

     You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text,
     and a passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end
     of the list of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one
     passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be
     added by (or through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the
     Document already includes a cover text for the same cover,
     previously added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity
     you are acting on behalf of, you may not add another; but you may
     replace the old one, on explicit permission from the previous
     publisher that added the old one.

     The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this
     License give permission to use their names for publicity for or to
     assert or imply endorsement of any Modified Version.

  5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS

     You may combine the Document with other documents released under
     this License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for
     modified versions, provided that you include in the combination
     all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents,
     unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections of your
     combined work in its license notice.

     The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
     multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
     copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name
     but different contents, make the title of each such section unique
     by adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the
     original author or publisher of that section if known, or else a
     unique number.  Make the same adjustment to the section titles in
     the list of Invariant Sections in the license notice of the
     combined work.

     In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled
     "History" in the various original documents, forming one section
     entitled "History"; likewise combine any sections entitled
     "Acknowledgments", and any sections entitled "Dedications".  You
     must delete all sections entitled "Endorsements."

  6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

     You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other
     documents released under this License, and replace the individual
     copies of this License in the various documents with a single copy
     that is included in the collection, provided that you follow the
     rules of this License for verbatim copying of each of the
     documents in all other respects.

     You may extract a single document from such a collection, and
     distribute it individually under this License, provided you insert
     a copy of this License into the extracted document, and follow
     this License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of
     that document.

  7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

     A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other
     separate and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of
     a storage or distribution medium, does not as a whole count as a
     Modified Version of the Document, provided no compilation
     copyright is claimed for the compilation.  Such a compilation is
     called an "aggregate", and this License does not apply to the
     other self-contained works thus compiled with the Document, on
     account of their being thus compiled, if they are not themselves
     derivative works of the Document.

     If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
     copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one
     quarter of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be
     placed on covers that surround only the Document within the
     aggregate.  Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole
     aggregate.

  8. TRANSLATION

     Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
     distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section
     4.  Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
     permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
     translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
     original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
     translation of this License provided that you also include the
     original English version of this License.  In case of a
     disagreement between the translation and the original English
     version of this License, the original English version will prevail.

  9. TERMINATION

     You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document
     except as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other
     attempt to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is
     void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this
     License.  However, parties who have received copies, or rights,
     from you under this License will not have their licenses
     terminated so long as such parties remain in full compliance.

 10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

     The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of
     the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
     versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
     differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
     `http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/'.

     Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version
     number.  If the Document specifies that a particular numbered
     version of this License "or any later version" applies to it, you
     have the option of following the terms and conditions either of
     that specified version or of any later version that has been
     published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.  If
     the Document does not specify a version number of this License,
     you may choose any version ever published (not as a draft) by the
     Free Software Foundation.

ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents
----------------------------------------------------

   To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and license
notices just after the title page:

       Copyright (C)  YEAR  YOUR NAME.
       Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
       under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
       or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
       with the Invariant Sections being LIST THEIR TITLES, with the
       Front-Cover Texts being LIST, and with the Back-Cover Texts being LIST.
       A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
       Free Documentation License''.

   If you have no Invariant Sections, write "with no Invariant Sections"
instead of saying which ones are invariant.  If you have no Front-Cover
Texts, write "no Front-Cover Texts" instead of "Front-Cover Texts being
LIST"; likewise for Back-Cover Texts.

   If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License, to
permit their use in free software.


File: groff,  Node: Request Index,  Next: Escape Index,  Prev: Copying This Manual,  Up: Top

Request Index
*************

   Requests appear without the leading control character (normally
either `.' or `'').

* Menu:

* ab:                                    Debugging.
* ad:                                    Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* af:                                    Assigning Formats.
* aln:                                   Setting Registers.
* als:                                   Strings.
* am:                                    Writing Macros.
* am1:                                   Writing Macros.
* ami:                                   Writing Macros.
* as:                                    Strings.
* as1:                                   Strings.
* asciify:                               Diversions.
* backtrace:                             Debugging.
* bd:                                    Artificial Fonts.
* blm:                                   Blank Line Traps.
* box:                                   Diversions.
* boxa:                                  Diversions.
* bp:                                    Page Control.
* br:                                    Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* break:                                 while.
* brp:                                   Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* c2:                                    Character Translations.
* cc:                                    Character Translations.
* ce:                                    Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* cf:                                    I/O.
* cflags:                                Using Symbols.
* ch:                                    Page Location Traps.
* char:                                  Using Symbols.
* chop:                                  Strings.
* close:                                 I/O.
* color:                                 Colors.
* composite:                             Using Symbols.
* continue:                              while.
* cp:                                    Implementation Differences.
* cs:                                    Artificial Fonts.
* cu:                                    Artificial Fonts.
* da:                                    Diversions.
* de:                                    Writing Macros.
* de1:                                   Writing Macros.
* defcolor:                              Colors.
* dei:                                   Writing Macros.
* di:                                    Diversions.
* do:                                    Implementation Differences.
* ds:                                    Strings.
* ds1:                                   Strings.
* dt:                                    Diversion Traps.
* ec:                                    Character Translations.
* ecr:                                   Character Translations.
* ecs:                                   Character Translations.
* el:                                    if-else.
* em:                                    End-of-input Traps.
* eo:                                    Character Translations.
* ev:                                    Environments.
* evc:                                   Environments.
* ex:                                    Debugging.
* fam:                                   Font Families.
* fc:                                    Fields.
* fchar:                                 Using Symbols.
* fi:                                    Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* fl:                                    Debugging.
* fp:                                    Font Positions.
* fschar:                                Using Symbols.
* fspecial:                              Special Fonts.
* ft <1>:                                Font Positions.
* ft:                                    Changing Fonts.
* ftr:                                   Changing Fonts.
* hc:                                    Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hcode:                                 Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hla:                                   Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hlm:                                   Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hpf:                                   Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hpfa:                                  Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hpfcode:                               Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hw:                                    Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hy:                                    Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hym:                                   Manipulating Hyphenation.
* hys:                                   Manipulating Hyphenation.
* ie:                                    if-else.
* if:                                    if-else.
* ig:                                    Comments.
* in:                                    Line Layout.
* it:                                    Input Line Traps.
* itc:                                   Input Line Traps.
* kern:                                  Ligatures and Kerning.
* lc:                                    Leaders.
* length:                                Strings.
* lf:                                    Debugging.
* lg:                                    Ligatures and Kerning.
* linetabs:                              Tabs and Fields.
* ll:                                    Line Layout.
* ls:                                    Manipulating Spacing.
* lt:                                    Page Layout.
* mc:                                    Miscellaneous.
* mk:                                    Page Motions.
* mso:                                   I/O.
* na:                                    Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* ne:                                    Page Control.
* nf:                                    Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* nh:                                    Manipulating Hyphenation.
* nm:                                    Miscellaneous.
* nn:                                    Miscellaneous.
* nop:                                   if-else.
* nr <1>:                                Auto-increment.
* nr:                                    Setting Registers.
* nroff:                                 Troff and Nroff Mode.
* ns:                                    Manipulating Spacing.
* nx:                                    I/O.
* open:                                  I/O.
* opena:                                 I/O.
* os:                                    Page Control.
* output:                                Diversions.
* pc:                                    Page Layout.
* pi:                                    I/O.
* pl:                                    Page Layout.
* pm:                                    Debugging.
* pn:                                    Page Layout.
* pnr:                                   Debugging.
* po:                                    Line Layout.
* ps:                                    Changing Type Sizes.
* psbb:                                  Miscellaneous.
* pso:                                   I/O.
* ptr:                                   Debugging.
* pvs:                                   Changing Type Sizes.
* rchar:                                 Using Symbols.
* rd:                                    I/O.
* return:                                Writing Macros.
* rfschar:                               Using Symbols.
* rj:                                    Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* rm:                                    Strings.
* rn:                                    Strings.
* rnn:                                   Setting Registers.
* rr:                                    Setting Registers.
* rs:                                    Manipulating Spacing.
* rt:                                    Page Motions.
* schar:                                 Using Symbols.
* shc:                                   Manipulating Hyphenation.
* shift:                                 Parameters.
* sizes:                                 Changing Type Sizes.
* so:                                    I/O.
* sp:                                    Manipulating Spacing.
* special:                               Special Fonts.
* spreadwarn:                            Debugging.
* ss:                                    Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* sty:                                   Font Families.
* substring:                             Strings.
* sv:                                    Page Control.
* sy:                                    I/O.
* ta:                                    Tabs and Fields.
* tc:                                    Tabs and Fields.
* ti:                                    Line Layout.
* tkf:                                   Ligatures and Kerning.
* tl:                                    Page Layout.
* tm:                                    Debugging.
* tm1:                                   Debugging.
* tmc:                                   Debugging.
* tr:                                    Character Translations.
* trf:                                   I/O.
* trin:                                  Character Translations.
* trnt:                                  Character Translations.
* troff:                                 Troff and Nroff Mode.
* uf:                                    Artificial Fonts.
* ul:                                    Artificial Fonts.
* unformat:                              Diversions.
* vpt:                                   Page Location Traps.
* vs:                                    Changing Type Sizes.
* warn:                                  Debugging.
* warnscale:                             Debugging.
* wh:                                    Page Location Traps.
* while:                                 while.
* write:                                 I/O.
* writec:                                I/O.
* writem:                                I/O.


File: groff,  Node: Escape Index,  Next: Operator Index,  Prev: Request Index,  Up: Top

Escape Index
************

   Any escape sequence `\X' with X not in the list below emits a
warning, printing glyph X.

* Menu:

* \:                                     Using Symbols.
* \!:                                    Diversions.
* \":                                    Comments.
* \#:                                    Comments.
* \$:                                    Parameters.
* \$*:                                   Parameters.
* \$0:                                   Parameters.
* \$@:                                   Parameters.
* \%:                                    Manipulating Hyphenation.
* \&:                                    Ligatures and Kerning.
* \':                                    Using Symbols.
* \):                                    Ligatures and Kerning.
* \*:                                    Strings.
* \,:                                    Ligatures and Kerning.
* \-:                                    Using Symbols.
* \.:                                    Character Translations.
* \/:                                    Ligatures and Kerning.
* \0:                                    Page Motions.
* \<colon>:                              Manipulating Hyphenation.
* \<RET>:                                Line Control.
* \<SP>:                                 Page Motions.
* \?:                                    Diversions.
* \\:                                    Character Translations.
* \^:                                    Page Motions.
* \`:                                    Using Symbols.
* \a:                                    Leaders.
* \A:                                    Identifiers.
* \b:                                    Drawing Requests.
* \B:                                    Expressions.
* \C:                                    Using Symbols.
* \c:                                    Line Control.
* \D:                                    Drawing Requests.
* \d:                                    Page Motions.
* \E:                                    Character Translations.
* \e:                                    Character Translations.
* \f:                                    Font Positions.
* \F:                                    Font Families.
* \f:                                    Changing Fonts.
* \g:                                    Assigning Formats.
* \h:                                    Page Motions.
* \H:                                    Artificial Fonts.
* \k:                                    Page Motions.
* \L:                                    Drawing Requests.
* \l:                                    Drawing Requests.
* \M:                                    Colors.
* \m:                                    Colors.
* \N:                                    Using Symbols.
* \n <1>:                                Auto-increment.
* \n:                                    Interpolating Registers.
* \O:                                    Suppressing output.
* \o:                                    Page Motions.
* \p:                                    Manipulating Filling and Adjusting.
* \r:                                    Page Motions.
* \R:                                    Setting Registers.
* \s:                                    Changing Type Sizes.
* \S:                                    Artificial Fonts.
* \t:                                    Tabs and Fields.
* \u:                                    Page Motions.
* \V:                                    I/O.
* \v:                                    Page Motions.
* \w:                                    Page Motions.
* \X:                                    Postprocessor Access.
* \x:                                    Manipulating Spacing.
* \Y:                                    Postprocessor Access.
* \Z:                                    Page Motions.
* \z:                                    Page Motions.
* \{:                                    if-else.
* \|:                                    Page Motions.
* \}:                                    if-else.
* \~:                                    Page Motions.


File: groff,  Node: Operator Index,  Next: Register Index,  Prev: Escape Index,  Up: Top

Operator Index
**************

* Menu:

* !:                                     Expressions.
* %:                                     Expressions.
* &:                                     Expressions.
* (:                                     Expressions.
* ):                                     Expressions.
* *:                                     Expressions.
* +:                                     Expressions.
* -:                                     Expressions.
* /:                                     Expressions.
* <:                                     Expressions.
* <=:                                    Expressions.
* <?:                                    Expressions.
* <colon>:                               Expressions.
* =:                                     Expressions.
* ==:                                    Expressions.
* >:                                     Expressions.
* >=:                                    Expressions.
* >?:                                    Expressions.

